Welcome! In this lecture we are going to be looking at how we can
start to programmatically keep score! If you can notice in the bottom left-
hand corner, I've got a score coming up every time I hit this box,
and we're going to be dealing with something called collisions and collision
components. See you in the lecture!
So our game is quite fun, as it is! You can shoot balls around
and watch them interact with each other and shoot many in all
sorts of directions, but there really is no scope or goal to this
game just yet. There's no way we can target anything, so
in this lecture we're going to have a look at that, and we're going
to do this using a concept called a collider.
So you may have noticed, if we look at our BasketballPrefab,
that we have a Sphere Collider on here. Now the Collider
is responsible for, as it may sound, ensuring that collisions happen
and that we, for example, the reason we can hit the ground
is because of this collider. So if I uncheck that, let's just check
the hypothesis. If I hit play, now you see it goes straight through the
ground, because there is no collision going on with the ground,
and you see the Cube does indeed have this Box Collider
on it. So, and while we're at it, let's not call this
Cube but actually change the name in the Inspector to Ground.
There we go! So just keeping things nice and
tight, in terms of the name.
Great, so we have the Sphere Collider! What we want is a
goal, so let me just zoom in. So if you double-click on something in the Hierarchy,
it takes it to the center of your viewpoint, and I'm going to take
a little look from the top. Now, what I want to
do is add in a Cube that we can aim at.
So I'm going to create a Cube, I'm just going to position it in front of
our Player. So let's just bring that up
and let's hit
play and check where it is in the viewport. OK, that
is doable. Now, you notice that this box
already has a collider on it, which is why we can bounce these balls
off of it, like so. So how do we make
use of this in code? How do we figure out what this
collider is doing? So let's start with a script, and we'll
call it a ScoreKeeper script. So
I'm going to right-click, Create, C# Script, and I'll call it
ScoreKeeper.
And we will drag this onto our Cube
and open the script.
That's OK, I'll go back to that later. I'm going to drag it onto the
Cube, and while I'm at it, I'm going to call the Cube something meaningful, I'm going to call it
the Target. OK,
notice I tend to spell all my objects, beginning with
a capital letter. I just like to keep that
convention but you might choose to do differently. It basically follows the
convention that Unity already uses, when it was adding in a directional light, for example. So
using capital case, and spaces are
allowed, obviously, in those names. So we'll go back to VisualStudio
and we don't want either of these two methods,
for now. We'll leave the Start () in, maybe for later, and the Update (), so just for
reference but we don't actually need them. What we do need is a
void method with OnCollision
Enter(), as the name, and as an
argument, it needs to take a Collision.
Now, we haven't seen arguments before,
but an argument is essentially like a variable that gets passed in
to a function. So when we're calling but we haven't seen
how we define them, and this is how we define it. We're saying that
OnCollisionEnter takes a parameter called
collision of type Collision.
So let's just print() out a log message,
when this happens, or say ("Ball hits
target!"). And
so we'll just check that the script is on the Target!
It is! And let's hit play and see whether that log message gets printed
out! So let's just
minimize the window, go to the Console,
and indeed, we're not getting what we would expect.
So I'm just going to check in Google that we
have the right signature, because sometimes even I forget,
and that is the way that you should be going about things, too.
So it does seem to be correcting
the way I have spelled this.
So it is quite possible that I
simply miss-spelled, but let's check what needs to be passed in.
So indeed, it's just this collision. So we can just copy and
paste it from here. That will make sure that we don't have any
kind of ambiguity about whether we spelled it correctly.
OK, I was simply missing an I somewhere, it seems, which is
a bit silly. There you go, you've seen my terrible spelling,
and you can all laugh at me! So we are going to try that
again, [Laughs] and hopefully this time without spelling errors. But it just goes
to show how important spelling is. OK there we go, we can see
in the bottom left-hand corner, that last log message, and that is that the ball
has indeed hit the target!
So once again, it is time for your challenge! I would like you to
keep the score, and I know it's a bit silly with just one
goal but, at the moment, let's just keep it simple! So
create a field in your script, to keep track of that score.
And what type should the field be? I just answered that
question in the discussions. And what type should your field be? And
explain a little bit why you think that's the case. And then, on each collision I'd like you
to increment that field and print out the score.
So print out the score once you have incremented it. OK, pause the video,
and have a go at this little challenge!
OK, so I hope you all had a go at the challenge! I'm going to dive right
in now! So I'm going to hop over into the script.
And as I said, I want to create a field, but what type should this field be?
So it shouldn't be public, because we don't want to expose it in the Editor,
but it should not be a float either, because
a float would be something that we can't count on our fingers, whereas a score
we can definitely count on our fingers, it is an int.
So I'm going to call this score and it's going to start out at 0.
Now what we're going to do is, each time
we're going to do our score++, which is,
if you remember correctly, increments, and we're going to say
("You scored.
Your current
score is ", and
then, we will just add in the + score) like this, using our string concatenation, which we're
fairly familiar with now. So let's go over into Unity,
and we are going to hit play and see whether our score printing now
works. OK, the score is 1, the score is
2. It does seem to be working now!
Every time I collide with our box my score gets
incremented [Laughs], and I get a nice big pile of balls building up
at the bottom here. Fantastic! Challenge complete! Let's move on to the
next lecture!